Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews. Almost with the publication of her first novel
in 1976, C. J. Cherryh became one of the most popular science fiction writers working
today. That first novel was Gate of Ivrel. Cherryh added two more books to make it
a trilogy, Well of Shiuan and Fires of Azeroth, and for Well of Shiuan she was given
the John W. Campbell Award as the best new writer of the year. Cherryh has
published some 15 novels since 1976 a very quick pace. Some of her better known
books include the Faded Sun trilogy, Brothers of Earth, Downbelow Station, The
Pride of Chanur, and Hunter of Worlds. In 1978 she won a Hugo Award for the short
story "Cassandra". We asked Cherryh if she'd been reading science fiction since
childhood. Yes I started reading science fiction. I suppose this is about the
earliest form of literature that I read. I never made a mental distinction
between science fiction fantasy uh anything of that nature because uh my parents
brought it to me to read and uh I just simply regarded it as the most
interesting the reading material that I had accessible so naturally when I began
turning to writing that's what I wrote. She went on to tell us why she decided to
start writing science fiction. Actually they took my television program off the
air. Um our television, at that time I was 10, television hadn't been around in
private homes very long. I had just time enough to get thoroughly addicted to uh
television science fiction and then it ran its course and it was gone from the
air so I in a fit of mourning and went into uh uh the bedroom picked up a tablet
and pencil and started writing my own novel. Cherryh is a talented writer with a
flair for style and structure. She might have been successful in any form of
writing she chose to pursue. She tells us why she didn't write other kinds of
books. Well I didn't write the other things because I didn't like them in general.
Um I find that uh uh I suppose the only thing outside of science fiction that
I've ever tried my hand at writing has been mysteries um and I don't care for
the modern fashion of those and I've always viewed them as a great deal more fun
to read than they are to write um mostly because you have to be extremely
controlled um and I suspect that mystery writers have to know who who did it, um
and I'd rather not know the end of my book. Um the other thing that I've tried my
hand at is historical fiction and I find again that's a straight jacket because
you're rather well held with what happened whether or not it makes artistic
sense so um just for the sheer pleasure of writing I prefer science fiction.
Donald Wollheim the owner and editor of DAW Books discovered Cherryh when she sent
him the manuscript for Gate of Ivrel. She explains why she picked Wollheim. I grew
fascinated with um with Wollheim as an editor because I had gone through my
library finally after seven years of trying to sell things and I thought well
there there must be a system to this. You see I had no professional help at all
and um I began searching my library to see what editor had published the
majority of uh works and writers that I liked, figuring that we might have
something in common as far as taste goes uh um so I began researching Don
Wollheim to see um um um what his preferences were uh where we differed and where
we were similar and uh so I began to conclude more and more that uh we were
fairly well synthetico when it came to uh to taste uh not quite the same all the
way down the line but uh generally there's a broad area of overlap uh so I found
him very easy to work with. We'll have more with C. J. Cherryh next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This is
David Crews and Daryl Lane. C. J. Cherryh published her first novel Gate of Ivrel in
1976. It was well received. Cherryh quickly built up a following of readers and was
acknowledged as one of the best new writers around. The popularity of Gate of
Ivrel was one reason Cherryh wrote two others on the same subject to form a
trilogy. The second book was Well of Shiuan and the third Fires of Azeroth. The
trilogy is exciting heroic fantasy that takes place on an alien world. There are
two main characters: Morgaine, a beautiful woman who wields a magic sword, and
Vanye, a man who has vowed to help her in a difficult task. Morgaine's task is to
destroy a space time gate left on Vanye's world. The gate is a still functioning
artifact left by a vanished race, the khal. The gate can be used to travel in time
or space transporting anyone who enters it to other places and times but the
gate and others like it on other planets is a danger to the universe. That sounds
like science fiction but it's not. The story occurs on a primitive planet with no
technology. Vanye and his people regard the gate as an object of magic and
superstitiously avoid it. They also consider Morgaine as an evil sorceress. Her
knowledge of technology to them is simply mysterious magic so the novel is
fantasy. The fighting is done with swords and transportation is by horse. Much of
Cherryh's later writing is straight science fiction with a large amount of hard
science in it we asked her why she started out with fantasy. Well I didn't. Um
they weren't the first books that I had written. There are others which are uh
tentative efforts that uh that didn't pan out in one way or another. Everybody
well I I won't say everybody but a majority of writers tend to have them. My
first love is really technology. The only thing is that I had been out of the
technological mainstream while they had made numerous scientific advances that I
was not current with and it annoys me a great deal to feel that I'm writing
something that is not technically accurate so or that I have glossed over
something it irritates me personally uh to postulate well. For instance we have a
gravity field here which keeps everyone's feet on the deck. I want to know how it
works so uh consequently I I wrote heroic fantasy while I was uh doing a great
deal of reading in Scientific American. Also heroic fantasy is an area where I
have a good deal of expertise since I have a major in classics, history,
archaeology, anthropology, this sort of thing but I'd always been a sort of a
hobbyist in the uh and a little more than a hobbyist since it was one of my
fields. In the history of technology throughout the three books we learned very
little about the background of Morgaine. We asked Cherryh if perhaps Morgaine is a
force or a creature who existed even before the khal, the builders of the gates.
Well actually now there's some of this that I I'm not about to give away uh as
regards to the history of Morgaine because that it gets into the uh the
possibility of a book that I'm working on at the moment. The first set of the
books, the gate books, involve much more the character of Vanye who is a medieval
man. I have to take his viewpoint or they cease to be heroic fantasy and they
begin to be a science fiction novel pure and simple because Morgaine is far more
technologically sophisticated than he is and if it were told from her viewpoint
it would begin to be a thing of numbers and calculus. Um Morgaine is far more
advanced. Exactly where she comes from and what she is I've preferred to leave to
the uh to the reader's estimation, although I will say that your uh your surmises
are fairly well down the center. We'll talk with C. J. Cherryh about some of her
other books next time. This
has been the Science Fiction Radio Show a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. C.J. Cherryh's 1982 novel, The Pride of
Chanur, is a fascinating depiction of alien cultures. Essentially, there's only
one human in the entire book, a wretched man named Tully, who's been picked up
after an accident aboard his spaceship. The aliens who end up with him are
called the Hani. We are with the Hani for the length of the novel, seeing
everything from their alien perspective. The Hani look and act like lions. We
asked Cherryh if this was deliberate. Yes, absolutely. This is one case where
I've taken the species of lions and, in a very simple way, devised a culture of
an advanced species, which very closely parallels the biology and, if you will,
social patterns of a lion pride. The title of the book, of course, is a three
-way pun. As an alert reader soon figures out, there is a three-way pun on the
title of Pride of Chanur. Pride of lions, the pride characteristic of the Hani
species, and the name of the Hani spaceship, which is called the Pride of
Chanur. Tully, the human who falls into Hani hands and gets mixed up in an
interstellar war, is a pitiful creature who both fears and needs the Hani.
Cherryh explains why he instinctively fears the lion-like species. Have you ever
seen a baboon react to a leopard? It's raw terror. A primate's nervous system is
not really set up to be setting in the center of a pride of lions. It's really
one of the most unkind things, I believe, that you could do to a human being, as
far as social patterns would be, to drop them right into the middle of a feline
culture. Sure, because the moves are all wrong. Well, for instance, Tully, being
a primate, smiles. And, of course, this is exactly the wrong thing to do. You
know what a lion does when it smiles. It's not a friendly gesture. Every gesture
he makes is wrong.
At least as far as he's concerned. In his own way, though, Cherryh says, Tully
acts with courage. He is, however, a very heroic human being, if you just simply
analyze what he has done. He has managed to survive a very horrendous situation.
He has managed to collect himself with some dignity out of a situation which
would have broken drastically. Any average individual would have definitely come
out of it damaged. He's been forced to take horrendous decisions, and he's been
dumped into a situation where even his personal value is of some question. And
yet he manages to stand up on his hind feet and confront the Hani captain with
a here I am, come and see if you can do something about it kind of attitude,
which is, of course, what wins the captain's respect in the beginning. He calms
down a little bit, as you will see, when he begins trying to deal with them,
doing what any sensible person would do when confronted with a situation where
you suspect that the beings around you are at least essentially friendly, and
there's no need provoking something that would be a total misunderstanding. So
he does remain a little bit quiet, but he's quiet partially because he's smart
and is trying to absorb more data than he gives out. The Pride of Chanur is a
typical C.J. Cherryh narrative, well plotted with finely drawn alien cultures and
full of exciting and realistic space battles. And that's what we've come to
expect from Cherryh. She doesn't seem to know how to write a bad book. More with
C.J. Cherryh on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. One of the finest science fiction trilogies
in recent years is C.J. Cherryh's Faded Sun series. It was published in the late
1970s under the titles Kesrith, Shon'Jir, and Kutath. There are few books in
science fiction that present an alien culture with the sensitivity and depth
that Cherryh has given to one of the alien races in the trilogy, the Mri. The
Mri are nomadic tribesmen of the desert. They are great warriors, and space
-faring races employ them as mercenaries. Cherryh says she didn't pattern the
Mri on any modern nomadic cultures, but she used her knowledge of ancient
history. When I did the Faded Sun novels, which are basically a desert culture,
I did not pattern it off any modern desert culture about which I know, frankly,
nothing. I patterned it strictly by taking what I know about desert survival and
earlier nomadic cultures here on Earth,
contrived a biology that would work under the extreme conditions that I
postulated, and then drew elements from here and there. It's very strange that I
now get letters from people that say that it very closely resembles a modern
terrestrial nomadic culture. But this is strictly a surprise to me. I suppose it
just says that I knew something about the very ancient one. We asked Cherryh what
she most admired about the Mri. I think that, for one thing, about the Mri, I
think I admire their steadfastness, their ability to face time itself with
tranquility, in the sense that they can take the long view, which is a thing
that is absolutely necessary, in my mind, for civilized survival. In my mind, I
don't say just survival, but civilized survival. It's their ability to look down
the centuries and see consequences. The Mri sense of time is a very strange
thing. A Mri always lives now, and that now is a composite of the past, current
events, and the future simultaneously. They do not view time as the modern
American does, which is more or less a set of beads on the string that we can
snip off any tail of the string that seems inconvenient to us. The Mri concept
of the universe is holistic. The Mri have almost been wiped out, because
they've been used as pawns in an interstellar war between humans and another
alien culture, the Regal. Duncan, a human who's been partly responsible for the
Mri's seemingly certain demise, is conscience-stricken at the possible end of
such a beautiful and ancient culture. His solution is to attempt to become a
Mri, although it may kill him and will certainly destroy his humanity. His
final sacrifice, in a sort of a redemptive sense, is that he finally agrees that
he will no longer attempt to be human, that he begins to try to be something
else. Even in that, there is a considerable hazard, because if the transition is
not complete, he may end up by contaminating the culture, which to the Mri and
their way of life is a very, very serious thing. But it is a voluntary and
conscious decision
that effectively it is personal suicide. And he takes it because he feels
responsible for what has happened. Duncan's attempt to become a Mri is one of
the most sensitive treatments of human-alien contact in science fiction. We'll
have more with C.J. Cherryh on our next program.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews. Hunter of Worlds, a 1977 novel by C.J.
Cherryh, is a different sort of science fiction book, a difficult one that
surprised a few of its readers. Cherryh has created a language for one of the
alien cultures in the novel, and the narrative is sprinkled with strange words
that slow a reader down. Cherryh admits that Hunter of Worlds is different from
other works. Hunter of Worlds is constructed for different reasons. Usually when
I use alien languages in a book, it is not for local color, it's just that when
you run across anybody's civilization, which is vastly different than your own,
you're going to come across three or four words which cannot be translated, no
matter how you would like to. It's just that not all languages have words for
concepts.
Well, you know, like in English, you can think of several things that you can
say that you can't say in French and vice versa, which is why language borrows
words from other languages. When I did Hunter of Worlds, I was doing something
totally different, and it is an experimental novel, and it is not a novel that I
recommend to someone who is not used to science fiction or not used to language,
one or the other. Basically on that one, the very premise of the book is
linguistics, treating the science of linguistics, as you will, as seriously as
you treat physics in a science fiction novel. I deliberately set out to make a
language which is not based on any earthly model. I even changed the rules of
grammar to something that, as far as I know, is not directly based on any
grammatical system on the face of the earth. The thing is explained in an
appendix in the back for people who wish to do this kind of thing. Cherryh has
some advice for those who read the novel. There are several ways to read the
book. The first one, the recommended one, is as the viewpoint character sees it.
Frankly, the viewpoint character is confused as all get out most of the time. He
doesn't understand. So you can equally well appreciate the book simply by
realizing that from his viewpoint, a lot of these people are speaking things at
him which he in no wise comprehends. The trouble with the book is that, of
course, at several points he's vastly mistaken about what he thinks he
understands. So the book does have some pitfalls in it for somebody who is
accustomed to believing everything that the hero in a novel believes must ergo
be the truth because he is very, very frequently mistaken or very, very
frequently picks up a concept which is not the whole concept and gradually
begins to arrive at an understanding of what's going on toward the end of the
book. But I must warn everyone that even at the end he is somewhat mistaken.
Cherryh says she has a special affection for the novel.
Cherryh says she has a
special affection for the novel.
And that one is sort of a... one of the very, very strange books that I can
reread and find something I didn't know was there. It's just kind of an odd
feeling.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.